Add protein structure vignette (#157)
jpquast/protti: vignettes/protein_structure_workflow.Rmd

The `map_peptides_on_structure()` function is capable of mapping a continuous value to a structure. In this case that values are again scaled between 50 and 100. In this case it is possible that values fall in between 50 and 100 which are displayed as a colour gradient step in between the colour in the middle of the gradient (50) and the colour at the end of the gradient (100). 

> _Note: If multiple structures are mapped at the same time, by default each structure scales its map values between 50 and 100 based on its minimum and maximum score. It is however possible to use one scale for all structures that are mapped with the `scale_per_structure` argument of the `map_peptides_on_structure()` function. In this case only one of the structures (the one containing the highest score) will have the 100 value and all other structures a value lower than that as their maximum value depending on their highest score. This means that the scale of colours between both structures is comparable._

Reviewer: delete "however" in second sentence

Reviewer: Maybe you should add the "scale_per_structure" argument in your example. I don't think this explanation is very clear

```{r calculate_and_map_scores, eval = test_protti, echo = FALSE, fig.align = "center", out.width = "100%"}
# Calculate the amino acid score
amino_acid_score <- calculate_aa_scores(
  data = ptsi_pgk_peptide_structure_positions,
  protein = pg_protein_accessions,
  diff = diff,
  adj_pval = adj_pval,
  start_position = start,
  end_position = end,
  retain_columns = c(pdb_ids, auth_asym_id)
)

# Map the score on structure
map_peptides_on_structure(
  peptide_data = amino_acid_score,
   uniprot_id = pg_protein_accessions,
   pdb_id = pdb_ids,
   chain = auth_asym_id,
   start_in_pdb = residue,
   end_in_pdb = residue,
   map_value = amino_acid_score,
   file_format = ".cif",
   export_location = "~/Desktop"
 )
```

> While the previous method of displaying only significantly changing peptides that have a minimum fold change is useful for the identification of regions that change the most, it is not robust to false positive peptides. The score on the other hand will only be high if an amino acid is consistently part of significant and differentially abundant peptides. The problem of the score is that it is hard and visually even impossible to interpret what a certain score means. This is due to the fact that the same score can be caused by two completely different scenarios. On the one hand an amino acid might be associated with peptides that have a low but highly significant change. On the other hand it can be associated with peptides that have a strong but less significant change. Both scenarios could yield the same amino acid score. Therefore, the score should not be misinterpreted as describing the extend of the change but should rather be seen as a probability that a certain amino acid is really structurally affected.

Reviewer: "extent" instead of "extend"

Reviewer: I would be suuuuper careful with what you write here. Maybe this should be checked at least with Patrick, if not even with Paola

In structural proteomics, protein structural changes can be determined using methods such as limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry ([LiP-MS](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2999)), cross-linking mass spectrometry ([XL-MS](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431)) and hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry ([HDX-MS](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2011/CS/C0CS00113A)). In case of LiP-MS, structural changes can be identified with peptide or precursor* centric proteomics in the form of peptide or precursor fold changes. Relating this information to positions within the 3D space of a protein can be very helpful to infer potential functional roles of those structural changes. If structural changes occur close to the active site of an enzyme, kinetics might be affected, if they occur at a protein-protein binding interface, the corresponding protein complex might have dissociated or assembled. 

> _*Peptide precursors are the different charge states of a peptide and the actual molecular unit that is detected in the mass spectrometer._

Author: Patrick and I discussed this and he thinks that modifications are not different precursors but different peptides. If you are sure of the definition we can change it back.

> _*Peptide precursors are the different charge states of a peptide and the actual molecular unit that is detected in the mass spectrometer._

Reviewer: A precursor is what is measured in the mass spec. That is amino acids connected by peptide bonds +/- modifications, in a specific charge state - this is also what you are saying in the text. The rest is probably a more philosophical question.

What you could write instead is something like:

*Peptide precursors are the different charge states of a peptide (+/- modifications) and the actual molecular unit that is detected in the mass spectrometer._

Would this make everyone happy?

# Getting started

Before starting the structural analysis of your data you need to load **protti** and additional packages used for the analysis. As described on the [main page](https://jpquast.github.io/protti/index.html) of **protti**, the [tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org) package collection works well together with the rest of the package, by design. You can load packages with the `library()` function.

```{r load_packages, eval = test_protti, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE}
# Load packages
library(protti)
library(dplyr)
library(magrittr)
library(stringr)
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
```

> We will demonstrate the use of **protti**s structure analysis functions based on a data set of peptides that were significantly changing in a LiP-MS experiment and thus point towards a structural change in the protein. 

Reviewer: **protti**'s

## Loading data

For this vignette we use a subset of two proteins from separate LiP-MS experiments that contain peptides significantly changing in abundance due to a structural change. We combined these two proteins into one data set to showcase that multiple proteins and structures can be analysed at once. The data was obtained from the paper "Dynamic 3D proteomes reveal protein functional alterations at high resolution in situ" ([Cappelletti 2021](https://www.cell.com/cell/pdf/S0092-8674(20)31691-3.pdf)). Both experiments were conducted on purified _E. coli_ proteins spiked into _E. coli_ lysates. The first protein is phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (pgk) which was treated with 25 mM 3-phosphoglyceric acid (3PG). The second protein is phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase (ptsI) which was treated with 25 mM fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP). 

Based on structural changes observed in these proteins the authors conclude that FBP binds to the active site of ptsI and acts as a competitive inhibitor, which is confirmed by an activity assay. The structural change in pgk caused by 3PG is likely representative of substrate occupancy and correlates with metabolic flux changes.

> The example data is included in protti and you can easily use it by calling the `data()` function. This will load the data into your R session.

Reviewer: `**protti**`

Reviewer: (bold)

```{r load_data, eval = test_protti, warning = FALSE}
utils::data("ptsi_pgk")
```

If you want to read your own data into R, we suggest using the `read_protti()` function. This function is a wrapper around the fast `fread()` function from the [`data.table`](https://rdatatable.gitlab.io/data.table/) package and the `clean_names()` function from the [`janitor`](http://sfirke.github.io/janitor/) package. This will allow you to not only load your data into R very fast, but also to clean up the column names into lower snake case. This will make it easier to remember them and to use them in your data analysis. Usually you would perform the following analysis after the analyses described in either the [vignette for single dose treatments](https://jpquast.github.io/protti/articles/data_analysis_single_dose_treatment_workflow.html) or the [vignette for dose response data](https://jpquast.github.io/protti/articles/data_analysis_dose_response_workflow.html).

```{r use_read_protti, eval=FALSE}
# Load data
your_data <- read_protti("your_differential_abundance_data.csv")
```

## Preparing data

> First we need to annotate the data with information required for structural data analysis. To find peptides in a protein structure we need to know their positions in the protein first. For this we can use the protti function `find_peptide()`. This function searches for the peptide within the protein sequence, which we need to fetch from UniProt. For this we can use the protti function `fetch_uniprot()`. In addition to the protein sequence we will also need information about PDB identifiers associated with the protein, which can also be accessed via UniProt.

Reviewer: `**protti**` (bold)

  scale_x_continuous(breaks = integer_breaks()) +
  labs(title = "Structure contact map 2HWG") +
  facet_wrap(~chain_combinations, scale = "free") +
  theme_bw()
```
The contact map for each structure provided as input will be saved as a separate element of a list, which is returned as the output of the `create_structure_contact_map()` function. These elements can be easily accessed using two square brackets (`[[]]`) right behind the name of the list. The brackets should either contain the name of the element or the index. You can also access each element in the list in a loop using the `map()` function from the `purrr` package.

Contact maps can be plotted using the `ggplot2` package if they are not too large. Contact maps are based on positions of atoms or residues in the structure. While atom IDs are unique, residues are only unique within a certain chain. That means residue position 1 is likely present in each of the chains. To correctly display contact map plots for residues they should be faceted by the unique combinations of chains. If e.g. the x-axis displays residues from chain A and the y-axis residues of chain B this should be displayed in one specific facet. 

> _Note: For the plot we actually recommend using the data base defined chain and residue identifiers in contrast to the author defined ones that were used as input to the `create_structure_contact_map()` function. The reason is that in the data base definitions each molecular entity has their own chain. If a certain protein is associated with a metal ion, these might be stored in the same chain in the author defined identifiers but separated into different chains for the data base identifiers. The problem is that in the author defined identifiers the residue numbers might not be consecutive and there could be a large gap in the numbering between the protein and the metal residue._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note: For the plot we recommend using the data base defined chain and residue identifiers in contrast to the author defined ones that were used as input to the `create_structure_contact_map()` function. The reason is that in the data base definitions each molecular entity has their own chain. If a certain protein is associated with e.g. a metal ion, these might be stored in the same chain in the author defined identifiers but separated into different chains for the data base identifiers. The problem is that in the author defined identifiers the residue numbers might not be consecutive and there could be a large gap in the numbering between the protein and the metal residue._
```

The two contact maps that were generated based on significant peptides reveal some interesting information about the positioning of the peptides. 

> The "1ZMR" structure contains only one protein chain (A). In the contact map of significant peptides that are all located in chain A in relation to all other residues in chain A we can see that even though some of the peptides are quite far apart in the sequence some are within 10 Angstrom distance in 3D space. Chain B and chain D are a calcium atom respectively. In case of chain B the atom is actually in close proximity to one of the significant peptides. Chain E stores information about water molecules in the structure. The contact map is not very informative in this case since the y-axis residue does not indicate any specific relationship of the water molecules with each other. Here it would be interesting to look at the distances of the water molecules to the peptide. If there are no water molecules in close proximity this might indicate that the peptide is not surface exposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "1ZMR" structure contains only one protein chain (A). In the contact map of significant peptides that are all located in chain A in relation to all other residues in chain A we can see that even though some of the peptides are quite far apart in the sequence, some are within 10 Angstrom distance in 3D space. Chain B and chain D are a calcium atom, respectively. In case of chain B the atom is in close proximity to one of the significant peptides. Chain E stores information about water molecules in the structure. The contact map is not very informative in this case, since the y-axis residue does not indicate any specific relationship of the water molecules with each other. Here it would be interesting to look at the distances of the water molecules to the peptide. If there are no water molecules in close proximity, this might indicate that the peptide is not surface exposed.
```

The "2HWG" structure contains two protein chains (A and B). Within each protein the significant peptides seem to be in close proximitiy to each other. In this case we can also observe that the peptide located around residue 555 is in close proximity to the other protein chain, which indicates that it might be located within a protein-protein interaction interface. Chain C and E contain a magnesium ion that seems to be in the proximity of two peptides. Chain D and F contain an oxalate ion which is known to inhibit ptsI. The oxalate ion is in very close proximity to to the same peptide that is close to the magnesium ion. This is likely the case because the oxalate ion and magnesium ion are located in the same site. Chain H and G contain water molecules.

> # Mapping of amino acids, peptides or regions on protein structures and predictions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Mapping of amino acids, peptides or regions on 3D protein structures and predictions
```

> Contact maps provide quantitative information about the distances of residues to each other. We can use these to perform further high throughput analysis. In contrast to the rather complex contact map plots it is easier to look at the actual protein structures and the respective peptide positions to get a better overview of the proximity of peptides to each other and in relation to interesting sites. While this analysis is more subjective, it can make certain relationships in the data more obvious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contact maps provide quantitative information about the distances of residues to each other. We can use them to perform further high throughput analysis. In contrast to the rather complex contact map plots it is easier to look at the actual protein structures and the respective peptide positions to get a better overview of the proximity of peptides to each other and in relation to interesting sites. While this analysis is more subjective, it can make certain relationships in the data more obvious.
```

For the mapping of peptides, protein regions or amino acids on PDB structures or AlphaFold predictions, we provide the `map_peptide_on_structure()` function. Mapping is accomplished based on the replacement of B-factor information in the structure file with peptide specific values. When the structure is coloured by B-factor in PyMOL or ChimeraX, peptides will get highlighted. This function can on the one hand just display categorical information such as if the peptide is significant, present or undetected. On the other hand, continuous information can be displayed such as a score associated with each individual amino acid.

The mapping is performed based on positions and not peptide sequence matching. If you want to perform the mapping onto a PDB structure, you should run the `find_peptide_in_structure()` beforehand to obtain structure specific positions. If you want to map onto an AlphaFold prediction it is not necessary to carry out this step. However, the output of the `find_peptide_in_structure()` function will contain all necessary information to perform also AlphaFold predictions in case there is no available structure file. 

> For this function it is important to provide the author defined positions and chain names which are marked with the `auth` prefix. This is the case because the function performs structural mapping based on this naming convention. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this function it is important to provide the author defined positions and chain names which are marked with the `auth` prefix. The function performs structural mapping based on this naming convention. 
```

_Note: If you perform mapping onto an AlphaFold prediction the content of the `pdb_id` provided column should be NA._

> _Note: If you want to map peptides to an unpublished or simply downloaded structure that you have the .pdb or .cif file of, you can provide the path to that structure to the `structure_file` argument. In this case you do not need to provide the `pdb_id` argument. It is very important that your input data frame `peptide_data` only contains information for the protein in the provided structure file and not for other unrelated proteins, otherwise mapping is not performed correctly._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note: If you want to map peptides to an unpublished or downloaded structure that you have the .pdb or .cif file of, you can provide the path to that structure to the `structure_file` argument. In this case you do not need to provide the `pdb_id` argument. It is very important that your input data frame `peptide_data` only contains information for the protein in the provided structure file and not for other unrelated proteins, otherwise mapping is not performed correctly._
```

> You provide information on colouring through the `map_value` argument. This should contain a numeric column. In the below example we insert the number 100 into this column if a peptide is significantly changing based on our previous cutoff criteria and the value 0 if it is not but was detected in the experiment. In this case you could simply insert any two numbers. However, the first number that colours your positive hits should be higher. The function will internally scale these values between 50 and 100. In this case 0 would become 50 and 100 stays 100. All regions of the structure that were not covered by any of you peptides receive the final value 0. This allows us to distinguish between covered (50-100) and non-covered (0) regions as well as covered non-signficiant (50) and significant regions (100). This is especially helpful if peptides are coloured according to a continuous score (see later in this vignette).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You provide information on colouring through the `map_value` argument. This should contain a numeric column. In the example below we insert the number 100 into this column if a peptide is significantly changing based on our previous cutoff criteria and the value 0 if it is not but was detected in the experiment. In this case you could simply insert any two numbers. However, the first number that colours your positive hits should be higher. The function will internally scale these values between 50 and 100. In this case 0 would become 50 and 100 stays 100. All regions of the structure that were not covered by any of you peptides receive the final value 0. This allows us to distinguish between covered (50-100) and non-covered (0) regions as well as covered non-significant (50) and significant regions (100). This is especially helpful if peptides are coloured according to a continuous score (see later in this vignette).
```

```{r peptide_mapping, eval = test_protti, warning = FALSE}
ptsi_pgk_peptide_structure_positions %>% 
  mutate(map_value = ifelse(eg_precursor_id %in% significant_peptides$eg_precursor_id, 
                            100, 
                            0)) %>% 
  map_peptides_on_structure(
   uniprot_id = pg_protein_accessions,
   pdb_id = pdb_ids,
   chain = auth_asym_id,
   auth_seq_id = auth_seq_id,
   map_value = map_value,
   file_format = ".pdb", 
   export_location = tempdir() # change to a location of your choice
 )
```

The function does not return anything in the R environment. Structures are directly saved in the desired format. The files contain the name of the structure and separated by "_" the name of all UniProt IDs present in the structure file.

To visualise coloured regions in your proteins you should open the file in either PyMOL or ChimeraX. There you have the option to colour structures by B-factor. Alternatively, we present an option within R using the `r3dmol` package to interactively display structures with the help of htmlwidgets.

> ### Structure mapping in R using r3dmol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3D structure mapping in R using r3dmol
```

It is possible to use the [`r3dmol`](https://swsoyee.github.io/r3dmol/index.html) package to visualize protein structures directly in R. The package is still under development and provides support for [`3Dmol.js`](https://3dmol.csb.pitt.edu/index.html). You can find extensive documentation and examples on their GitHub page. Below we provide a specific example of how to use the package in order to visualise structures created by `map_peptides_on_structure()` in R colouring by B-factors. Later we provide an example of how to use a colour gradient. In fact the same function that is used later can also be used in this case.

If you run the code snippets on your own make sure you replace `paste0(tempdir(), "/1ZMR_P0A799.pdb")` with the location and file you want to visualise.

> The impressive thing about using `r3dmol` is that you can interact with the structure if this Vignette is an html document. You can for example zoom, rotate or move the structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`r3dmol` facilitates direct interaction with the structure if this vignette is exported as an html document. You can for example zoom, rotate or move the structure.
```

knitr::include_graphics("figures/peptide_map_2hwg.png")
```

```{r interaction_2hwg, eval = test_protti, echo = FALSE, fig.align = "center", out.width = "60%", fig.cap = "**ptsI (2HWG) binding interface of significantly chaging peptide.**"}
knitr::include_graphics("figures/interaction_2hwg.png")
```

Mapping of significantly changing peptides onto the pgk structure reveals that most of the protein seems to be structurally affected by the treatment with 3-phosphoglyceric acid (3PG). Based on UniProt annotations and the similarity of the protein to its homologues in other organisms, the 3PG binding site is located on the left side indicated with a black arrow. None of the residues involved in the interaction with 3PG are found in a significantly changing peptide. Due to the compact size of the protein and the even distribution of significant peptides it is hard to draw any conclusions about potential structural effects of the treatment.

```{r peptide_map_1zmr, eval = test_protti, echo = FALSE, fig.align = "center", fig.cap = "**pgk (1ZMR) with mapped significantly changing peptides.**"}
knitr::include_graphics("figures/peptide_map_1zmr.png")
```

## Mapping of amino acid scores

> In order to narrow down and prioritize structurally affected protein regions we have developed the amino acid scoring function `calculate_aa_scores()`. For each amino acid position in the protein the function calculates the average product of the -log10(adjusted p-value) and the absolute log2(fold change) per peptide covering the amino acid position. In other words the information of all the peptides in a specific region is integrated, which strengthens the confidence of a structural change being true since false positive peptides are averaged out. One downside of this approach is that it relies on very good coverage of the protein since otherwise false positive peptides with high scores that solely cover a specific region are not distinguishable from real hits. In our example we are lucky that both proteins have a very high coverage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to narrow down and prioritize structurally affected protein regions, we have developed the amino acid scoring function `calculate_aa_scores()`. For each amino acid position in the protein the function calculates the average product of the -log10(adjusted p-value) and the absolute log2(fold change) per peptide, covering the amino acid position. In other words, the information of all the peptides in a specific region is integrated, which strengthens the confidence of a structural change being true since false positive peptides are averaged out. One downside of this approach is that it relies on very good sequence coverage since otherwise false positive peptides with high scores that solely cover a specific region are not distinguishable from real hits. In our example we are lucky that both proteins have a very high coverage.
```

```{r calculate_and_map_scores, eval = test_protti, echo = FALSE, fig.align = "center", out.width = "100%"}
# Calculate the amino acid score
amino_acid_score <- calculate_aa_scores(
  data = ptsi_pgk_peptide_structure_positions,
  protein = pg_protein_accessions,
  diff = diff,
  adj_pval = adj_pval,
  start_position = start,
  end_position = end,
  retain_columns = c(pdb_ids, auth_asym_id)
)

# Map the score on structure
map_peptides_on_structure(
  peptide_data = amino_acid_score,
   uniprot_id = pg_protein_accessions,
   pdb_id = pdb_ids,
   chain = auth_asym_id,
   auth_seq_id = residue,
   map_value = amino_acid_score,
   file_format = ".pdb",
   export_location = tempdir()
 )
```

> While the previous method of displaying only significantly changing peptides that have a minimum fold change is useful for the identification of regions that change the most, it is not robust to false positive peptides. The score on the other hand will only be high if an amino acid is consistently part of significant and differentially abundant peptides. The problem of the score is that it is hard and visually even impossible to interpret what a certain score means. This is due to the fact that the same score can be caused by two completely different scenarios. On the one hand an amino acid might be associated with peptides that have a low fold change but are highly significant. On the other hand it can be associated with peptides that have a high fold change but are of low significance. Both scenarios could yield the same amino acid score. Therefore, the score should not be misinterpreted as describing the extent of the change but should rather be seen as a probability that a certain amino acid is really structurally affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the previous method of displaying only significantly changing peptides that have a minimum fold change is useful for the identification of regions that change the most, it is not resistant to false positive peptides. The score on the other hand will only be high if an amino acid is consistently part of significant and differentially abundant peptides. The problem of the score is that it is hard and visually even impossible to interpret what a certain score means. This is due to the fact that the same score can be caused by two completely different scenarios. On the one hand, an amino acid might be associated with peptides that have a low fold change but are highly significant. On the other hand it can be associated with peptides that have a high fold change but are of low significance. Both scenarios could yield the same amino acid score. Therefore, the score should not be misinterpreted as describing the extent of the change but should rather be seen as a probability that a certain amino acid is structurally affected.
```

```{r score_3d_structure_mapping, eval = test_protti, echo=TRUE, warning=FALSE}
# create a color gradient with 101 colors
color_gradient <- paste0('"', 
                         paste(colorRampPalette(c("white", "#90EE90", "#FF7276"))(101), 
                               collapse = '", "'), 
                         '"')

# create structure
r3dmol() %>%
  m_add_model(data = paste0(tempdir(), "/2HWG_P08839.pdb"), format = "pdb") %>%
  m_set_style(style = m_style_cartoon(
    colorfunc = paste0("
        function(atom) {
          const color = [", color_gradient,"]
          return color[Math.round(atom.b)]
        }")
  )) %>%
  m_zoom_to()
```

> Applying the score to both structures definitely refines the region that is most robustly affected by the treatment. For ptsI it seems that a region of amino acids directly in the active center are consistently affected. In addition we see a small region below, which was previously not seen due to its low fold changes that did not meet the cutoff. The score tells us that this region is indeed consistently affected and that there is likely a structural change occurring even though the fold change of peptides is rather low (based on looking at the tables). The region in the binding interface previously indicated with a black arrow is now not highlighted anymore, indicating that this was likely a false positive hit and that other peptides in the same region do not exhibit a strong and significant response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applying the score to both structures refines the region that is most robustly affected by the treatment. For ptsI it seems that a region of amino acids directly in the active center are consistently affected. In addition we see a small region below, which was previously not seen due to its low fold changes that did not meet the cutoff. The score tells us that this region is indeed consistently affected and that there is likely a structural change occurring even though the fold change of peptides is rather low. The region in the binding interface previously indicated with a black arrow is now not highlighted anymore, indicating that this was likely a false positive hit and that other peptides in the same region do not exhibit a strong and significant response.
```

```{r peptide_map_2hwg_score, eval = test_protti, echo = FALSE, fig.align = "center", fig.cap = "**ptsI (2HWG) with mapped amino acid scores.**"}
knitr::include_graphics("figures/peptide_map_2hwg_score.png")
```

> For ptg it becomes more clear that the most robustly changing region is indeed very close to the binding site of 3PG, which the protein was treated with. In this case the score helped to refine the binding site of the compound a lot since previously basically the whole protein was covered with significantly changing peptides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ptg we see that the most robustly changing region is very close to the binding site of 3PG, which the protein was treated with. In this case, the score helped to refine the binding site of the compound since previously almost the whole protein was covered with significantly changing peptides.
```
